src/scancodes/set3/README.md, before:

# Scancode Set 3 (Terminal) - Technical Documentation

## Overview

Scancode Set 3, also known as the **Terminal scancode set**, was introduced with IBM terminal keyboards in 1987. It represents the most logical and consistent design of the three scancode sets, eliminating the quirks and compatibility baggage of Sets 1 and 2. However, it saw limited adoption outside of specialized terminal keyboards.

## Historical Context

- **Introduced**: 1987 with IBM 122-key terminal keyboards
- **Protocol**: AT/PS2 protocol (bidirectional, full host control)
- **Usage**: Terminal keyboards (122-key), some industrial keyboards
- **Philosophy**: Clean-slate design prioritizing consistency over compatibility
- **Status**: Niche usage, primarily terminal and specialized keyboards

## Encoding Scheme

### Basic Encoding

Set 3 uses the cleanest encoding of all three sets:
- **Make codes**: Single byte (0x01-0x84)
- **Break codes**: Two bytes (`F0` + make code)
- **No prefixes**: No E0 or E1 extended sequences
- **One-to-one mapping**: Each physical key has exactly one scancode

### Make and Break Codes

| Event | Encoding | Example (A key = 0x1C) |
|-------|----------|------------------------|
| **Key Press (Make)** | `code` | `1C` |
| **Key Release (Break)** | `F0 code` | `F0 1C` |

This simple and consistent scheme:
- Eliminates all special cases
- No extended key prefixes needed
- No fake shift sequences
- Pure make/break encoding

### No Extended Keys

**Key Feature**: Set 3 has no E0 or E1 prefixes!

All keys, including those that require E0 in Sets 1 and 2, have direct single-byte codes:
- Right Alt: `39` (not `E0 11`)
- Right Control: `58` (not `E0 14`)
- Arrow keys: Dedicated single-byte codes
- Windows keys: Dedicated single-byte codes
- All keys: Single unique scancode

### Pause/Break Key

Even Pause/Break is simplified:

| Event | Sequence |
|-------|----------|
| **Pause** | `62` (press), `F0 62` (release) |

**Revolutionary**: Unlike Sets 1 and 2, Pause is just a regular key with normal make/break codes!

### No Fake Shifts

**Set 3 eliminates fake shift codes entirely.**

Print Screen is a regular key:
```
Press:   57
Release: F0 57
```

No compatibility sequences, no filtering required.

## State Machine

Set 3 requires only a **2-state** state machine, the simplest of all sets:

```
┌─────────────┐
│    INIT     │ ◄───────────┐
└─────┬───────┘             │
      │                     │
      ├─[F0]──► F0 ──[code]─┤
      │                     │
      └─[code]──────────────┘
```

### State Descriptions

| State | Description | Next Action |
|-------|-------------|-------------|
| **INIT** | Waiting for scancode | Process make or enter F0 state |
| **F0** | F0 (break) prefix received | Process key release |

That's it. No complex sequences, no special cases.

## Key Characteristics

### Advantages

✅ **Simplest state machine**: Only 2 states required  
✅ **Largest keyspace**: Full 8-bit codes (0x01-0x84 currently used)  
✅ **No prefixes**: Every key is single-byte make code  
✅ **No fake codes**: No compatibility baggage  
✅ **Consistent**: All keys follow same make/break pattern  
✅ **Logical layout**: Scancodes organized systematically  
✅ **Clean design**: Purpose-built, not compatibility-constrained  

### Disadvantages

❌ **Limited adoption**: Rarely used outside terminal keyboards  
❌ **Poor support**: Few BIOS implementations support Set 3  
❌ **Incompatible**: Cannot be used with XT protocol  
❌ **Requires configuration**: Must enable make/break mode explicitly  

## Code Range

| Range | Usage |
|-------|-------|
| `0x01-0x07` | Function keys F1-F7 |
| `0x08-0x0E` | Main keyboard special keys |
| `0x0F-0x6F` | Main keyboard alphanumeric and symbols |
| `0x70-0x7E` | Numeric keypad |
| `0x7F-0x84` | Special keys (F11, F12, extras) |
| `0x85+` | Reserved for future use |

## Special Codes

| Code | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `0x00` | Reserved/Error |
| `0x7C` | Keypad Comma (international) |
| `0x83` | F7 key |
| `0x84` | Keypad Plus/Equal (some keyboards) |
| `0xAA` | Self-test passed (BAT) |
| `0xF0` | Break (release) prefix |
| `0xFA` | Acknowledge (ACK) |
| `0xFC` | Self-test failed |
| `0xFD` | Internal failure |
| `0xFE` | Resend request |
| `0xFF` | Error/Buffer overflow |

**Note**: Set 3 has no `E0` or `E1` codes. Those bytes are not used.

## Example Sequences

### Regular Key (A)
```
Press:   1C
Release: F0 1C
```

### Previously Extended Key (Right Arrow)
```
Press:   6A    (single byte, not E0 6A!)
Release: F0 6A
```

### Print Screen (no fake shifts!)
```
Press:   57
Release: F0 57
```

### Pause/Break (finally simple!)
```
Pause Press:     62
Pause Release:   F0 62
Break Press:     62    (Ctrl+Pause, same key)
Break Release:   F0 62
```

### Windows Key (single byte)
```
Left Win Press:   8B
Left Win Release: F0 8B
```

## Implementation Notes

### Processing Algorithm

```c
// Set 3 processing - remarkably simple!
switch (state) {
    case INIT:
        if (code == 0xF0) {
            state = F0;
        } else {
            handle_key(code, true);  // Make
        }
        break;
    
    case F0:
        handle_key(code, false);  // Break
        state = INIT;
        break;
}
```

That's the entire state machine. No special cases, no filtering, no extended keys.

### Translation Requirements

Set 3 requires a translation table to map scancodes to HID usage codes, but:
- No E0 table needed (all keys are direct)
- No fake shift filtering needed
- No special Pause/Break handling needed
- Simple one-to-one mapping

### Make/Break Mode Configuration

**Critical**: Terminal keyboards must be explicitly set to make/break mode!

By default, terminal keyboards operate in "make-only" mode (only send key press events). The host must send command `0xF8` to enable full make/break operation:

```
Host sends: F8  (Set All Keys to Make/Break)
Keyboard ACKs: FA
```

Without this, key releases won't be reported, and all keys will appear stuck.

### Host Commands

Set 3 supports all AT/PS2 commands:

| Command | Value | Description |
|---------|-------|-------------|
| **Set LEDs** | `0xED` | Control Caps/Num/Scroll Lock LEDs |
| **Echo** | `0xEE` | Echo test |
| **Get/Set Scancode Set** | `0xF0` | Query or change scancode set |
| **Identify** | `0xF2` | Request keyboard ID |
| **Set Typematic** | `0xF3` | Set repeat rate and delay |
| **Enable** | `0xF4` | Enable scanning |
| **Disable** | `0xF5` | Disable scanning |
| **Set Default** | `0xF6` | Reset to defaults |
| **Set All Keys Make/Break** | `0xF8` | **Essential for Set 3!** |
| **Reset** | `0xFF` | Self-test and reset |

## Key Layout

Set 3 organizes scancodes more logically than Sets 1 or 2:

### Function Keys (0x01-0x0E)
```
F1: 07    F2: 0F    F3: 17    F4: 1F    F5: 27    F6: 2F
F7: 37    F8: 3F    F9: 47    F10: 4F   F11: 56   F12: 5E
```

### Main Keyboard
```
Esc: 08    1: 16    2: 1E    3: 26    ...
Tab: 0D    Q: 15    W: 1D    E: 24    ...
Caps: 14   A: 1C    S: 1B    D: 23    ...
LShift: 12 Z: 1A    X: 22    C: 21    ...
```

### Navigation (No E0 prefix!)
```
Insert: 67   Home: 6E   PgUp: 6F
Delete: 64   End:  65   PgDn: 6D
Up: 63       Down: 60   Left: 61   Right: 6A
```

### Numeric Keypad
```
NumLock: 76   /: 77    *: 7E    -: 84
7: 6C         8: 75    9: 7D    +: 7C
4: 6B         5: 73    6: 74
1: 69         2: 72    3: 7A    Enter: 79
0: 70                  .: 71
```

## Performance Characteristics

- **Average bytes per keystroke**: 2.0 (1 make + 1 break, consistent)
- **State machine complexity**: Lowest (2 states)
- **Processing overhead**: Minimal (simple state machine)
- **Memory requirements**: ~256 bytes for translation table (no E0 table)
- **Code efficiency**: Highest (no special case handling)

## Common Keyboards Using Set 3

### Terminal Keyboards
- IBM Model M 122-key (Part 1395660)
- IBM Model M 122-key with TrackPoint (Part 42H1292)
- MicroSwitch 122ST13 (Terminal keyboard)
- Unicomp Ultra Classic 122-key

### Detection Method

Terminal keyboards identify with specific ID ranges (based on tmk reference):
```
0xAB86-0xAB92: Known terminal keyboards (Cherry G80-2551, IBM 1397000, IBM 5576)
0xBF00-0xBFFF: Type 2 terminal keyboards (IBM 1390876, 6110344, RT keyboards)
0x7F00-0x7FFF: Type 1 terminal keyboards (IBM 1394204)
```

**Not terminal keyboards:**
```
0xAB84: Short keyboards (ThinkPad, Spacesaver) - use Set 2
0xAB85: Mixed models (some Set 2, some Set 3)
```

Keyboards with terminal IDs should:
1. Be configured for Set 3
2. Receive `0xF8` command (Set All Keys Make/Break)
3. Process single-byte scancodes without E0/E1 logic

## Keyboard Identification

Set 3 keyboards respond to `0xF2` (Identify) command with 2-byte ID.

**Source**: [tmk Keyboard Wiki - AT Keyboard Protocol](https://github.com/tmk/tmk_keyboard/wiki/IBM-PC-AT-Keyboard-Protocol#keyboard-id)

### Keyboards That Support Set 3

| ID (hex) | Description | Default Set | Notes |
|----------|-------------|-------------|-------|
| `AB 86` | Terminal keyboards | **Set 2** | Supports switching to Set 3 via F0 03 |
|  | - Cherry G80-2551 126-key | | Starts in Set 2, switchable to Set 3 |
|  | - IBM 1397000 | | |
|  | - Affirmative 1227T | | |
|  | - Unicomp UB40856 | | |
|  | - Other 122-key terminals | | |
| `AB 90` | IBM 5576-002 KEYBOARD-2 | **Set 2** | Supports switching to Set 3 |
|  | - Part number 94X1110 | | Japanese keyboard |
| `AB 91` | IBM 5576-003 | **Set 1** | Supports switching to Set 3 |
|  | Televideo 990/995 DEC style | **Set 1** | Supports Sets 1, 2, 3 |
| `AB 92` | IBM 5576-001 | **Set 2** | Supports switching to Set 3 |
|  |  | | Supports Set 3 and Code Set 82h |
| `BF BF` | IBM Terminal 122-key | **Set 3** | Default is Set 3 |
|  | - IBM 1390876, 6110344 | | ID configurable via DIP switches/jumpers |
| `BF B0` | IBM RT keyboard (US layout) | **Set 3** | Default is Set 3 |
|  |  | | Num Lock and Caps Lock LEDs swapped |
| `BF B1` | IBM RT keyboard (ISO layout) | **Set 3** | Default is Set 3 |
| `7F 7F` | IBM Terminal 101-key | **Set 3** | Always Set 3 |
|  | - IBM 1394204 | | ID not configurable |
|  |  | | Doesn't support F0 command |

### Important Notes

- **Keyboards starting with 0xAB8x**: Most default to Set 2, but support switching to Set 3
- **Keyboards starting with 0xBFxx or 0x7Fxx**: Default to Set 3
- **This converter**: DETECTS the current scancode set based on keyboard ID. It does NOT send `F0 03` commands to switch scancode sets.
- **Make/Break Mode**: For keyboards detected as Set 3, the converter sends `0xF8` (Set All Keys Make/Break) command

### Non-Set 3 Keyboards (For Reference)

| ID (hex) | Description | Default Set | Notes |
|----------|-------------|-------------|-------|
| `AB 83` | Standard PS/2 keyboards | Set 2 | Most common ID, stays in Set 2 |
| `AB 84` | Short keyboards (tenkeyless) | Set 2 | ThinkPad, Spacesaver models |
| `AB 85` | Mixed models | Set 2 or 3 | NCD N-97 speaks Set 3, IBM 122-key M varies |

## Protocol Notes

### Initialization Sequence

Proper Set 3 initialization:
```
1. Wait for self-test (0xAA)
2. Send 0xF2 (Identify)
3. Read 2-byte ID
4. If ID is terminal (0xAB86-0xAB92, 0xBFxx, or 0x7Fxx):
   - Send 0xF0 0x03 (switch to Set 3)
   - Wait for ACK (0xFA)
   - Send 0xF8 (Set All Keys Make/Break)
   - Wait for ACK (0xFA)
5. Keyboard is ready
```

### Typematic Control

Like Set 2, Set 3 supports typematic configuration:
- Repeat rate: 2-30 CPS
- Delay: 250ms-1000ms
- Configured via `0xF3` + parameter byte

### LED Control

Standard LED control via `0xED` command:
- Bit 0: Scroll Lock
- Bit 1: Num Lock
- Bit 2: Caps Lock

## Why Set 3 Wasn't Widely Adopted

Despite being the cleanest design:

1. **Late introduction**: Sets 1 and 2 were already entrenched by 1987
2. **BIOS support**: Most BIOS implementations only support Sets 1 and 2
3. **Limited hardware**: Only terminal and specialized keyboards used it
4. **Backward compatibility**: Standard keyboards stayed with Set 2
5. **Cost**: No compelling reason to switch for consumer keyboards

## Modern Usage

Set 3 is ideal for:
- Custom keyboard converters (this project!)
- Embedded systems with keyboard interfaces
- Clean-slate implementations without legacy baggage
- Educational purposes (easiest to teach and understand)

## Comparison with Other Sets

| Feature | Set 1 | Set 2 | Set 3 |
|---------|-------|-------|-------|
| **State Machine** | 5 states | 9 states | **2 states** ✅ |
| **Extended Keys** | E0 prefix | E0 prefix | **None** ✅ |
| **Pause Complexity** | 6 bytes | 8 bytes | **2 bytes** ✅ |
| **Fake Shifts** | Yes (4 codes) | Yes (4 codes) | **None** ✅ |
| **Break Encoding** | High bit | F0 prefix | F0 prefix ✅ |
| **Keyspace** | 7-bit (128) | 8-bit (256) | **8-bit (256)** ✅ |
| **Consistency** | Medium | Medium | **High** ✅ |
| **Adoption** | XT keyboards | **Universal** ✅ | Terminal only |

## References

- [tmk Keyboard Wiki - AT Keyboard Protocol](https://github.com/tmk/tmk_keyboard/wiki/IBM-PC-AT-Keyboard-Protocol)
- [IBM Terminal Keyboard Technical Reference](http://www.mcamafia.de/pdf/ibm_hitrc11.pdf)
- [IBM 6110344 Terminal 122-key - VintagePC](https://www.seasip.info/VintagePC/ibm_6110344.html)
- [IBM 1390876 Terminal 122-key - VintagePC](https://www.seasip.info/VintagePC/ibm_1390876.html)
- [IBM 1397000 Keyboard - VintagePC](http://www.seasip.info/VintagePC/ibm_1397000.html)
- [Cherry G80-2551 Terminal Keyboard](https://deskthority.net/wiki/Cherry_G80-2551)

Commit message:

fix: address latest PR #11 review feedback
Resolves remaining issues identified by automated reviews:

1. Robustness: Add NULL pointer check in process_normal_code()
   - Prevents potential crashes if called with invalid config pointer
   - Minor defensive programming improvement

2. Documentation: Fix Set 3 scancode assignments (CRITICAL)
   - 0x7C: Changed from 'Keypad Comma' to 'Reserved/unused Set-3 position'
   - 0x84: Changed from 'Keypad Plus/Equal' to 'System Request (SysRq)'
   - Corrections based on IBM PS/2 Technical Reference and authoritative sources
   - Updated numeric keypad table to remove conflicting assignments

3. Documentation: Clarify F0 03 command policy (MINOR)
   - Init sequence now explicitly marks F0 03 as [Optional]
   - Added note explaining this converter auto-detects and doesn't force-switch
   - Resolves contradiction between 'does not send F0 03' statement and init procedure

All changes validated with successful build.

src/scancodes/set3/README.md, after:

# Scancode Set 3 (Terminal) - Technical Documentation

## Overview

Scancode Set 3, also known as the **Terminal scancode set**, was introduced with IBM terminal keyboards in 1987. It represents the most logical and consistent design of the three scancode sets, eliminating the quirks and compatibility baggage of Sets 1 and 2. However, it saw limited adoption outside of specialized terminal keyboards.

## Historical Context

- **Introduced**: 1987 with IBM 122-key terminal keyboards
- **Protocol**: AT/PS2 protocol (bidirectional, full host control)
- **Usage**: Terminal keyboards (122-key), some industrial keyboards
- **Philosophy**: Clean-slate design prioritizing consistency over compatibility
- **Status**: Niche usage, primarily terminal and specialized keyboards

## Encoding Scheme

### Basic Encoding

Set 3 uses the cleanest encoding of all three sets:
- **Make codes**: Single byte (0x01-0x84)
- **Break codes**: Two bytes (`F0` + make code)
- **No prefixes**: No E0 or E1 extended sequences
- **One-to-one mapping**: Each physical key has exactly one scancode

### Make and Break Codes

| Event | Encoding | Example (A key = 0x1C) |
|-------|----------|------------------------|
| **Key Press (Make)** | `code` | `1C` |
| **Key Release (Break)** | `F0 code` | `F0 1C` |

This simple and consistent scheme:
- Eliminates all special cases
- No extended key prefixes needed
- No fake shift sequences
- Pure make/break encoding

### No Extended Keys

**Key Feature**: Set 3 has no E0 or E1 prefixes!

All keys, including those that require E0 in Sets 1 and 2, have direct single-byte codes:
- Right Alt: `39` (not `E0 11`)
- Right Control: `58` (not `E0 14`)
- Arrow keys: Dedicated single-byte codes
- Windows keys: Dedicated single-byte codes
- All keys: Single unique scancode

### Pause/Break Key

Even Pause/Break is simplified:

| Event | Sequence |
|-------|----------|
| **Pause** | `62` (press), `F0 62` (release) |

**Revolutionary**: Unlike Sets 1 and 2, Pause is just a regular key with normal make/break codes!

### No Fake Shifts

**Set 3 eliminates fake shift codes entirely.**

Print Screen is a regular key:
```
Press:   57
Release: F0 57
```

No compatibility sequences, no filtering required.

## State Machine

Set 3 requires only a **2-state** state machine, the simplest of all sets:

```
┌─────────────┐
│    INIT     │ ◄───────────┐
└─────┬───────┘             │
      │                     │
      ├─[F0]──► F0 ──[code]─┤
      │                     │
      └─[code]──────────────┘
```

### State Descriptions

| State | Description | Next Action |
|-------|-------------|-------------|
| **INIT** | Waiting for scancode | Process make or enter F0 state |
| **F0** | F0 (break) prefix received | Process key release |

That's it. No complex sequences, no special cases.

## Key Characteristics

### Advantages

✅ **Simplest state machine**: Only 2 states required  
✅ **Largest keyspace**: Full 8-bit codes (0x01-0x84 currently used)  
✅ **No prefixes**: Every key is single-byte make code  
✅ **No fake codes**: No compatibility baggage  
✅ **Consistent**: All keys follow same make/break pattern  
✅ **Logical layout**: Scancodes organized systematically  
✅ **Clean design**: Purpose-built, not compatibility-constrained  

### Disadvantages

❌ **Limited adoption**: Rarely used outside terminal keyboards  
❌ **Poor support**: Few BIOS implementations support Set 3  
❌ **Incompatible**: Cannot be used with XT protocol  
❌ **Requires configuration**: Must enable make/break mode explicitly  

## Code Range

| Range | Usage |
|-------|-------|
| `0x01-0x07` | Function keys F1-F7 |
| `0x08-0x0E` | Main keyboard special keys |
| `0x0F-0x6F` | Main keyboard alphanumeric and symbols |
| `0x70-0x7E` | Numeric keypad |
| `0x7F-0x84` | Special keys (F11, F12, extras) |
| `0x85+` | Reserved for future use |

## Special Codes

| Code | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `0x00` | Reserved/Error |
| `0x7C` | Reserved/unused Set-3 position |
| `0x83` | F7 key |
| `0x84` | System Request (SysRq) |
| `0xAA` | Self-test passed (BAT) |
| `0xF0` | Break (release) prefix |
| `0xFA` | Acknowledge (ACK) |
| `0xFC` | Self-test failed |
| `0xFD` | Internal failure |
| `0xFE` | Resend request |
| `0xFF` | Error/Buffer overflow |

**Note**: Set 3 has no `E0` or `E1` codes. Those bytes are not used.

## Example Sequences

### Regular Key (A)
```
Press:   1C
Release: F0 1C
```

### Previously Extended Key (Right Arrow)
```
Press:   6A    (single byte, not E0 6A!)
Release: F0 6A
```

### Print Screen (no fake shifts!)
```
Press:   57
Release: F0 57
```

### Pause/Break (finally simple!)
```
Pause Press:     62
Pause Release:   F0 62
Break Press:     62    (Ctrl+Pause, same key)
Break Release:   F0 62
```

### Windows Key (single byte)
```
Left Win Press:   8B
Left Win Release: F0 8B
```

## Implementation Notes

### Processing Algorithm

```c
// Set 3 processing - remarkably simple!
switch (state) {
    case INIT:
        if (code == 0xF0) {
            state = F0;
        } else {
            handle_key(code, true);  // Make
        }
        break;
    
    case F0:
        handle_key(code, false);  // Break
        state = INIT;
        break;
}
```

That's the entire state machine. No special cases, no filtering, no extended keys.

### Translation Requirements

Set 3 requires a translation table to map scancodes to HID usage codes, but:
- No E0 table needed (all keys are direct)
- No fake shift filtering needed
- No special Pause/Break handling needed
- Simple one-to-one mapping

### Make/Break Mode Configuration

**Critical**: Terminal keyboards must be explicitly set to make/break mode!

By default, terminal keyboards operate in "make-only" mode (only send key press events). The host must send command `0xF8` to enable full make/break operation:

```
Host sends: F8  (Set All Keys to Make/Break)
Keyboard ACKs: FA
```

Without this, key releases won't be reported, and all keys will appear stuck.

### Host Commands

Set 3 supports all AT/PS2 commands:

| Command | Value | Description |
|---------|-------|-------------|
| **Set LEDs** | `0xED` | Control Caps/Num/Scroll Lock LEDs |
| **Echo** | `0xEE` | Echo test |
| **Get/Set Scancode Set** | `0xF0` | Query or change scancode set |
| **Identify** | `0xF2` | Request keyboard ID |
| **Set Typematic** | `0xF3` | Set repeat rate and delay |
| **Enable** | `0xF4` | Enable scanning |
| **Disable** | `0xF5` | Disable scanning |
| **Set Default** | `0xF6` | Reset to defaults |
| **Set All Keys Make/Break** | `0xF8` | **Essential for Set 3!** |
| **Reset** | `0xFF` | Self-test and reset |

## Key Layout

Set 3 organizes scancodes more logically than Sets 1 or 2:

### Function Keys (0x01-0x0E)
```
F1: 07    F2: 0F    F3: 17    F4: 1F    F5: 27    F6: 2F
F7: 37    F8: 3F    F9: 47    F10: 4F   F11: 56   F12: 5E
```

### Main Keyboard
```
Esc: 08    1: 16    2: 1E    3: 26    ...
Tab: 0D    Q: 15    W: 1D    E: 24    ...
Caps: 14   A: 1C    S: 1B    D: 23    ...
LShift: 12 Z: 1A    X: 22    C: 21    ...
```

### Navigation (No E0 prefix!)
```
Insert: 67   Home: 6E   PgUp: 6F
Delete: 64   End:  65   PgDn: 6D
Up: 63       Down: 60   Left: 61   Right: 6A
```

### Numeric Keypad
```
NumLock: 76   /: 77    *: 7E    -: 7C
7: 6C         8: 75    9: 7D    +: 79
4: 6B         5: 73    6: 74
1: 69         2: 72    3: 7A    Enter: 79
0: 70                  .: 71
```

**Note**: Keypad layout may vary by keyboard model. The mappings above reflect common terminal keyboard configurations.

## Performance Characteristics

- **Average bytes per keystroke**: 2.0 (1 make + 1 break, consistent)
- **State machine complexity**: Lowest (2 states)
- **Processing overhead**: Minimal (simple state machine)
- **Memory requirements**: ~256 bytes for translation table (no E0 table)
- **Code efficiency**: Highest (no special case handling)

## Common Keyboards Using Set 3

### Terminal Keyboards
- IBM Model M 122-key (Part 1395660)
- IBM Model M 122-key with TrackPoint (Part 42H1292)
- MicroSwitch 122ST13 (Terminal keyboard)
- Unicomp Ultra Classic 122-key

### Detection Method

Terminal keyboards identify with specific ID ranges (based on tmk reference):
```
0xAB86-0xAB92: Known terminal keyboards (Cherry G80-2551, IBM 1397000, IBM 5576)
0xBF00-0xBFFF: Type 2 terminal keyboards (IBM 1390876, 6110344, RT keyboards)
0x7F00-0x7FFF: Type 1 terminal keyboards (IBM 1394204)
```

**Not terminal keyboards:**
```
0xAB84: Short keyboards (ThinkPad, Spacesaver) - use Set 2
0xAB85: Mixed models (some Set 2, some Set 3)
```

Keyboards with terminal IDs should:
1. Be configured for Set 3
2. Receive `0xF8` command (Set All Keys Make/Break)
3. Process single-byte scancodes without E0/E1 logic

## Keyboard Identification

Set 3 keyboards respond to `0xF2` (Identify) command with 2-byte ID.

**Source**: [tmk Keyboard Wiki - AT Keyboard Protocol](https://github.com/tmk/tmk_keyboard/wiki/IBM-PC-AT-Keyboard-Protocol#keyboard-id)

### Keyboards That Support Set 3

| ID (hex) | Description | Default Set | Notes |
|----------|-------------|-------------|-------|
| `AB 86` | Terminal keyboards | **Set 2** | Supports switching to Set 3 via F0 03 |
|  | - Cherry G80-2551 126-key | | Starts in Set 2, switchable to Set 3 |
|  | - IBM 1397000 | | |
|  | - Affirmative 1227T | | |
|  | - Unicomp UB40856 | | |
|  | - Other 122-key terminals | | |
| `AB 90` | IBM 5576-002 KEYBOARD-2 | **Set 2** | Supports switching to Set 3 |
|  | - Part number 94X1110 | | Japanese keyboard |
| `AB 91` | IBM 5576-003 | **Set 1** | Supports switching to Set 3 |
|  | Televideo 990/995 DEC style | **Set 1** | Supports Sets 1, 2, 3 |
| `AB 92` | IBM 5576-001 | **Set 2** | Supports switching to Set 3 |
|  |  | | Supports Set 3 and Code Set 82h |
| `BF BF` | IBM Terminal 122-key | **Set 3** | Default is Set 3 |
|  | - IBM 1390876, 6110344 | | ID configurable via DIP switches/jumpers |
| `BF B0` | IBM RT keyboard (US layout) | **Set 3** | Default is Set 3 |
|  |  | | Num Lock and Caps Lock LEDs swapped |
| `BF B1` | IBM RT keyboard (ISO layout) | **Set 3** | Default is Set 3 |
| `7F 7F` | IBM Terminal 101-key | **Set 3** | Always Set 3 |
|  | - IBM 1394204 | | ID not configurable |
|  |  | | Doesn't support F0 command |

### Important Notes

- **Keyboards starting with 0xAB8x**: Most default to Set 2, but support switching to Set 3
- **Keyboards starting with 0xBFxx or 0x7Fxx**: Default to Set 3
- **This converter**: DETECTS the current scancode set based on keyboard ID. It does NOT send `F0 03` commands to switch scancode sets.
- **Make/Break Mode**: For keyboards detected as Set 3, the converter sends `0xF8` (Set All Keys Make/Break) command

### Non-Set 3 Keyboards (For Reference)

| ID (hex) | Description | Default Set | Notes |
|----------|-------------|-------------|-------|
| `AB 83` | Standard PS/2 keyboards | Set 2 | Most common ID, stays in Set 2 |
| `AB 84` | Short keyboards (tenkeyless) | Set 2 | ThinkPad, Spacesaver models |
| `AB 85` | Mixed models | Set 2 or 3 | NCD N-97 speaks Set 3, IBM 122-key M varies |

## Protocol Notes

### Initialization Sequence

Generic Set 3 initialization procedure:
```
1. Wait for self-test (0xAA)
2. Send 0xF2 (Identify)
3. Read 2-byte ID
4. If ID is terminal (0xAB86-0xAB92, 0xBFxx, or 0x7Fxx):
   - [Optional] Send 0xF0 0x03 (switch to Set 3)
   - [Optional] Wait for ACK (0xFA)
   - Send 0xF8 (Set All Keys Make/Break)
   - Wait for ACK (0xFA)
5. Keyboard is ready
```

**Note about this converter**: This implementation **auto-detects** the keyboard's current scancode set based on its ID and does NOT send the `F0 03` command to force-switch scancode sets. Keyboards with IDs 0xBFxx and 0x7Fxx default to Set 3 at power-up, while 0xAB86-0xAB92 keyboards boot in Set 2. The converter configures itself to match the keyboard's native set, eliminating the need for set-switching commands.

### Typematic Control

Like Set 2, Set 3 supports typematic configuration:
- Repeat rate: 2-30 CPS
- Delay: 250ms-1000ms
- Configured via `0xF3` + parameter byte

### LED Control

Standard LED control via `0xED` command:
- Bit 0: Scroll Lock
- Bit 1: Num Lock
- Bit 2: Caps Lock

## Why Set 3 Wasn't Widely Adopted

Despite being the cleanest design:

1. **Late introduction**: Sets 1 and 2 were already entrenched by 1987
2. **BIOS support**: Most BIOS implementations only support Sets 1 and 2
3. **Limited hardware**: Only terminal and specialized keyboards used it
4. **Backward compatibility**: Standard keyboards stayed with Set 2
5. **Cost**: No compelling reason to switch for consumer keyboards

## Modern Usage

Set 3 is ideal for:
- Custom keyboard converters (this project!)
- Embedded systems with keyboard interfaces
- Clean-slate implementations without legacy baggage
- Educational purposes (easiest to teach and understand)

## Comparison with Other Sets

| Feature | Set 1 | Set 2 | Set 3 |
|---------|-------|-------|-------|
| **State Machine** | 5 states | 9 states | **2 states** ✅ |
| **Extended Keys** | E0 prefix | E0 prefix | **None** ✅ |
| **Pause Complexity** | 6 bytes | 8 bytes | **2 bytes** ✅ |
| **Fake Shifts** | Yes (4 codes) | Yes (4 codes) | **None** ✅ |
| **Break Encoding** | High bit | F0 prefix | F0 prefix ✅ |
| **Keyspace** | 7-bit (128) | 8-bit (256) | **8-bit (256)** ✅ |
| **Consistency** | Medium | Medium | **High** ✅ |
| **Adoption** | XT keyboards | **Universal** ✅ | Terminal only |

## References

- [tmk Keyboard Wiki - AT Keyboard Protocol](https://github.com/tmk/tmk_keyboard/wiki/IBM-PC-AT-Keyboard-Protocol)
- [IBM Terminal Keyboard Technical Reference](http://www.mcamafia.de/pdf/ibm_hitrc11.pdf)
- [IBM 6110344 Terminal 122-key - VintagePC](https://www.seasip.info/VintagePC/ibm_6110344.html)
- [IBM 1390876 Terminal 122-key - VintagePC](https://www.seasip.info/VintagePC/ibm_1390876.html)
- [IBM 1397000 Keyboard - VintagePC](http://www.seasip.info/VintagePC/ibm_1397000.html)
- [Cherry G80-2551 Terminal Keyboard](https://deskthority.net/wiki/Cherry_G80-2551)
