docs/scancodes/set2.md, before:

# Scancode Set 2 (AT/PS2)

Scancode Set 2 was introduced with the IBM PC/AT and is used by PS/2 keyboards and many USB keyboards that internally use PS/2-style scancodes.

Set 2 differs from Set 1 in encoding: break codes use an F0 prefix rather than a high-bit flag (bit 7), allowing the full 8-bit range for make codes. The F0 prefix encoding requires a 9-state processing state machine compared to Set 1's 5-state machine. Certain sequences such as Pause/Break use longer multi-byte sequences in Set 2 than in Set 1. Set 2 supports bidirectional communication—the host can send commands to the keyboard for LED control, typematic (key repeat) configuration, and scancode set selection.

## Encoding Scheme

### Basic Encoding

Set 2 encoding:
- **Make codes**: Single byte (0x01-0x83)
- **Break codes**: Two bytes (`F0` + make code)
- No high-bit encoding for release

### Make and Break Codes

| Event | Encoding | Example (A key = 0x1C) |
|-------|----------|------------------------|
| **Key Press (Make)** | `code` | `1C` |
| **Key Release (Break)** | `F0 code` | `F0 1C` |

This scheme provides:
- Clear separation between make and break events
- Full 8-bit keyspace for make codes
- Consistent two-byte break sequences

### Extended Keys (E0 Prefix)

The IBM Enhanced Keyboard (introduced with the IBM AT) added keys not present on the original keyboard. Set 2 uses the E0 prefix byte to encode these extended keys in a separate namespace from existing scancodes. Extended keys use three bytes for a complete press/release cycle: E0 (prefix), scancode (press), and F0 + scancode (release).

Extended keys use a multi-byte sequence:

| Event | Encoding | Example (Right Control = 0x14) |
|-------|----------|--------------------------------|
| **Extended Make** | `E0 code` | `E0 14` |
| **Extended Break** | `E0 F0 code` | `E0 F0 14` |

Extended keys include:
- Right Alt (AltGr): `E0 11`
- Right Control: `E0 14`
- Arrow keys: `E0 75` (Up), `E0 72` (Down), `E0 6B` (Left), `E0 74` (Right)
- Navigation: Insert, Delete, Home, End, Page Up, Page Down
- Windows keys: `E0 1F` (Left Win), `E0 27` (Right Win)
- Application key: `E0 2F`
- Multimedia keys: Various `E0` sequences
- Keypad `/`: `E0 4A`

### Pause/Break Key (E1 Prefix)

The Pause/Break key uses a complex sequence in Set 2:

| Event | Sequence |
|-------|----------|
| **Pause** | `E1 14 77 E1 F0 14 F0 77` (8 bytes!) |
| **Break** (Ctrl+Pause) | `E0 7E E0 F0 7E` |
| **Unicomp Pause** | `E0 77 E0 F0 77` (Unicomp New Model M variant) |

**Important**: 
- Pause sends the full 8-byte sequence on press only
- No separate release event for Pause
- Break (Ctrl+Pause) is a different 4-byte sequence (E0 7E)
- Some keyboards (Unicomp) use E0 77 for Pause instead of E1 sequence

**USB HID Mapping:**
- All Pause variants map to **interface code 0x48** (USB HID Pause/Break key)
- E1 sequences (regular Pause): `E1 14 77` → 0x48
- E0 7E (Ctrl+Pause): `E0 7E` → 0x48 (with Ctrl modifier)
- E0 77 (Unicomp): `E0 77` → 0x48
- See Issue #21 for historical context on E0 mapping fixes
- Note: Some very old or non-compliant keyboards may not emit the E1 prefix for Pause
  (they instead send a bare sequence that looks like Ctrl+NumLock). Such keyboards cannot
  be reliably distinguished from intentional Ctrl+key combinations in firmware without
  introducing fragile heuristics that break other combinations. Recommended workaround:
  remap an unused physical key (for example Scroll Lock) to PAUS in your keyboard
  configuration if you need a dedicated Pause key for a non-compliant keyboard.

### Fake Shift Codes

Set 2 Print Screen sequences include "fake shift" codes similar to Set 1, but with different scancode values. Implementations must filter these fake shift codes to prevent unintended Shift key events.

Set 2 Print Screen sequences include fake shift codes:

| Sequence | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `E0 12 E0 7C` | Print Screen press (fake left shift + actual) |
| `E0 F0 7C E0 F0 12` | Print Screen release |

**Fake shift bytes to ignore:**
- `E0 12` - Fake Left Shift press
- `E0 F0 12` - Fake Left Shift release
- `E0 59` - Fake Right Shift press (rare)
- `E0 F0 59` - Fake Right Shift release (rare)

## State Machine

Set 2 requires a **9-state** state machine:

```
┌─────────────┐
│    INIT     │ ◄─────────────────────────────┐
└─────┬───────┘                               │
      │                                       │
      ├─[F0]──► F0 ──[code]──────────────────┤
      │                                       │
      ├─[E0]──► E0 ──┬─[F0]──► E0_F0 ──[code]┤
      │              │                        │
      │              └─[code]─────────────────┤
      │                                       │
      ├─[E1]──► E1 ──[14]──► E1_14 ──[77]──► E1_14_77 ──[E1]──► E1_PAUSE ──[F0]──► E1_F0 ──[14]──► E1_F0_14 ──[F0]──► E1_F0_14_F0 ──[77]───┐
      │                                                                                                                                          │
      └─[code]────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

### State Descriptions

| State | Description | Next Action |
|-------|-------------|-------------|
| **INIT** | Waiting for scancode | Process code or enter prefix state |
| **F0** | F0 (break) prefix received | Process key release |
| **E0** | E0 (extended) prefix received | Extended key or break |
| **E0_F0** | E0 F0 sequence received | Extended key release |
| **E1** | E1 (Pause) prefix received | Begin Pause sequence |
| **E1_14** | E1 14 received | Expect 77 |
| **E1_14_77** | E1 14 77 received | Expect E1 |
| **E1_PAUSE** | E1 14 77 E1 received | Expect F0 |
| **E1_F0** | E1 14 77 E1 F0 received | Expect 14 |
| **E1_F0_14** | E1 14 77 E1 F0 14 received | Expect F0 |
| **E1_F0_14_F0** | E1 14 77 E1 F0 14 F0 received | Expect 77, complete |

## Key Characteristics

**What works well:**

The keyspace is larger—full 8-bit make codes mean you can have up to 256 keys without resorting to complex workarounds. All break codes follow the same structure: F0 followed by the make code, which is more consistent than Set 1's high-bit approach. The prefix bytes clearly separate extended keys from normal ones, and breaks from makes. Practically every PC keyboard supports Set 2, so compatibility's excellent. The bidirectional protocol means the host can control LEDs, adjust typematic behaviour, and send other commands to the keyboard.

**Where it gets complicated:**

Your state machine grows to 9 states to handle all the possible sequences. Every keystroke needs at least 2 bytes (one for make, two for break), which makes it more verbose than Set 1. Print Screen still requires filtering fake shifts, which is a compatibility holdover. The Pause key uses an 8-byte sequence. The translation tables are a bit larger too, around 300 bytes versus Set 1's standard size.  

## Code Range

| Range | Usage |
|-------|-------|
| `0x01-0x07` | F keys (F7-F12, partial) |
| `0x08-0x0E` | F keys and special |
| `0x0F-0x7E` | Main keyboard keys |
| `0x7F-0x83` | Extended keys, special codes |
| `0x84+` | Reserved |

## Special Codes

| Code | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `0x00` | Error/Overrun |
| `0x83` | F7 key |
| `0x84` | Alt Print Screen (some keyboards) |
| `0xAA` | Self-test passed (BAT) |
| `0xE0` | Extended key prefix |
| `0xE1` | Pause/Break prefix |
| `0xEE` | Echo response |
| `0xF0` | Break (release) prefix |
| `0xFA` | Acknowledge (ACK) |
| `0xFC` | Self-test failed |
| `0xFD` | Internal failure |
| `0xFE` | Resend request |
| `0xFF` | Error/Buffer overflow |

## Example Sequences

### Regular Key (A)
```
Press:   1C
Release: F0 1C
```

### Extended Key (Right Arrow)
```
Press:   E0 74
Release: E0 F0 74
```

### Print Screen (with fake shifts)
```
Press:   E0 12 E0 7C  (filter E0 12, process E0 7C)
Release: E0 F0 7C E0 F0 12  (process E0 F0 7C, filter E0 F0 12)
```

### Pause/Break
```
Pause:   E1 14 77 E1 F0 14 F0 77  (8 bytes, press only, no release)
Break:   E0 7E E0 F0 7E            (Ctrl+Pause, separate 4-byte sequence)
```

### Multimedia Key (Volume Up, example)
```
Press:   E0 32
Release: E0 F0 32
```

## Implementation Notes

### Processing Algorithm

```c
// Simplified Set 2 processing
switch (state) {
    case INIT:
        if (code == 0xF0) {
            state = F0;
        } else if (code == 0xE0) {
            state = E0;
        } else if (code == 0xE1) {
            state = E1;
        } else {
            handle_key(code, true);  // Make
        }
        break;
    
    case F0:
        handle_key(code, false);  // Break
        state = INIT;
        break;
    
    case E0:
        if (code == 0xF0) {
            state = E0_F0;
        } else if (code != 0x12 && code != 0x59) {
            // Filter fake shifts
            uint8_t key = translate_e0_key(code);
            handle_key(key, true);  // Extended make
            state = INIT;
        } else {
            state = INIT;  // Filtered fake shift
        }
        break;
    
    case E0_F0:
        if (code != 0x12 && code != 0x59) {
            uint8_t key = translate_e0_key(code);
            handle_key(key, false);  // Extended break
        }
        state = INIT;
        break;
    
    case E1:
        // Pause sequence handling...
        break;
}
```

### Translation Requirements

E0-prefixed keys require translation:
- Map extended scancodes to logical key codes
- Distinguish numeric keypad from navigation cluster
- Handle multimedia and browser control keys
- Support ACPI power keys (some keyboards)

### Host Commands

Set 2 supports bidirectional communication:

| Command | Value | Description |
|---------|-------|-------------|
| **Set LEDs** | `0xED` | Control Caps/Num/Scroll Lock LEDs |
| **Echo** | `0xEE` | Echo test (keyboard responds with `0xEE`) |
| **Get/Set Scancode Set** | `0xF0` | Query or change scancode set |
| **Identify** | `0xF2` | Request keyboard ID (2 bytes) |
| **Set Typematic** | `0xF3` | Set repeat rate and delay |
| **Enable** | `0xF4` | Enable keyboard scanning |
| **Disable** | `0xF5` | Disable keyboard scanning |
| **Set Default** | `0xF6` | Reset to default parameters |
| **Reset** | `0xFF` | Keyboard self-test and reset |

### Typematic (Auto-Repeat)

Set 2 keyboards support configurable typematic:
- **Repeat rate**: 2-30 characters per second
- **Delay**: 250ms, 500ms, 750ms, or 1000ms
- Configured via `0xF3` command + parameter byte

## Performance Characteristics

- **Average bytes per keystroke**: 2.5 (1 make + 2 break on average)
- **State machine complexity**: High (9 states)
- **Processing overhead**: Medium (more state transitions)
- **Memory requirements**: ~300 bytes for E0 translation table

## Source Code

- **[`scancode.h`](../../src/scancodes/set2/scancode.h)** - Set 2 processor interface
- **[`scancode.c`](../../src/scancodes/set2/scancode.c)** - State machine implementation
- **[Unified Processor](../../src/scancodes/set123/)** - Multi-set processor including Set 2

## Keyboards Using Set 2

- All standard PS/2 keyboards (1987-present)
- IBM Model M keyboards with AT/PS2 interface
- IBM Model F PC/AT keyboards (with timeout, default to Set 2)
- Modern USB keyboards in PS/2 compatibility mode
- Cherry MX keyboards with PS/2 interface
- Mechanical keyboards with PS/2 option

## Keyboard Identification

Set 2 keyboards respond to `0xF2` (Identify) command with 2-byte ID.

**Source**: [tmk Keyboard Wiki - AT Keyboard Protocol](https://github.com/tmk/tmk_keyboard/wiki/IBM-PC-AT-Keyboard-Protocol#keyboard-id)

### Set 2 Keyboard IDs

| ID (hex) | Description | Models | Notes |
|----------|-------------|--------|-------|
| None | IBM PC/AT 84-key (Model F) | IBM 6450225 | Doesn't respond to 0xF2 |
| `AB 41` | MF2 keyboard (PS/2 standard) | Standard PS/2 keyboards | |
| `AB 83` | MF2 keyboard with translator | Standard PS/2 ID | Cherry G80-3600, IBM 101, Topre Realforce, etc. |
| `AB 84` | Short keyboard (no numpad) | Tenkeyless, Spacesaver | ThinkPad keyboards, space-saving models |
| `AB 85` | Mixed models | NCD N-97, IBM 122-key Model M | NCD N-97 uses Set 3, IBM 122-key varies |

### Terminal Keyboard IDs (Support Set 3)

These keyboards support Set 3, but many default to Set 2 or Set 1:

| ID (hex) | Description | Default Set | Supports |
|----------|-------------|-------------|----------|
| `AB 86` | Terminal keyboards | Set 2 | Set 3 |
|  | - Cherry G80-2551 126-key | | |
|  | - IBM 1397000 | | |
|  | - Unicomp UB40856 | | |
|  | - Other 122-key terminals | | |
| `AB 90` | IBM 5576-002 (Japanese) | Set 2 | Set 3 |
| `AB 91` | IBM 5576-003 (Japanese) | Set 1 | Sets 2, 3 |
|  | Televideo 990/995 DEC style | Set 1 | Sets 2, 3 |
| `AB 92` | IBM 5576-001 (Japanese) | Set 2 | Set 3, 82h |
| `BF BF` | IBM Terminal 122-key | Set 3 | - |
|  | - IBM 1390876, 6110344 | | DIP switch configurable ID |
| `BF B0` | IBM RT keyboard (US) | Set 3 | - |
| `BF B1` | IBM RT keyboard (ISO) | Set 3 | - |
| `7F 7F` | IBM Terminal 101-key | Set 3 | - |
|  | - IBM 1394204 | | Always Set 3, doesn't support F0 |

**Important**: This converter DETECTS which scancode set these keyboards are currently using based on their ID. It does NOT send `F0 03` commands to switch scancode sets. For keyboards detected as Set 3, the converter only sends the `0xF8` command to configure make/break mode.


## Protocol Notes

### LED Control

Host can control LEDs via `0xED` command:
```
Host sends: ED
Keyboard ACKs: FA
Host sends: LED bitmap (bit 0=Scroll, bit 1=Num, bit 2=Caps)
Keyboard ACKs: FA
```

### Scancode Set Switching (Manual Commands)

Keyboards that support multiple scancode sets can be switched manually by the host:
```
Host sends: F0 01  (switch to Set 1)
Host sends: F0 02  (switch to Set 2)
Host sends: F0 03  (switch to Set 3)
```

**Note**: These are commands available to the host system. This converter does NOT send these commands automatically - it detects the keyboard's current scancode set based on the keyboard ID.


## References

- [IBM Personal Computer AT Technical Reference (1986)](http://bitsavers.org/pdf/ibm/pc/at/6183355_PC_AT_Technical_Reference_Mar86.pdf)
- [PS/2 Hardware Technical Reference (1990)](http://www.mcamafia.de/pdf/pdfref.htm)
- [tmk Keyboard Wiki - AT Keyboard Protocol](https://github.com/tmk/tmk_keyboard/wiki/IBM-PC-AT-Keyboard-Protocol)
- [Microsoft Keyboard Scan Code Specification](https://download.microsoft.com/download/1/6/1/161ba512-40e2-4cc9-843a-923143f3456c/scancode.pdf)
- [IBM Model F AT - VintagePC](https://www.seasip.info/VintagePC/ibm_6450225.html)
---

## Related Documentation

- [AT/PS2 Protocol](../protocols/at-ps2.md) - Protocol specification using Scancode Set 2
- [Protocols Overview](../protocols/README.md) - All supported protocols
- [Architecture](../advanced/README.md) - System architecture and scancode processing

---

**Questions or stuck on something?**  
Pop into [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/PaulW/rp2040-keyboard-converter/discussions) or [report a bug](https://github.com/PaulW/rp2040-keyboard-converter/issues) if you've found an issue.

Commit message:

fix(scancodes): Add defense-in-depth filtering for self-test codes
Implement explicit filtering of self-test codes (0xAA, 0xFC) in Set 1
scancode processor to prevent collision with valid Left Shift break code.

Problem:
- Set 1's 0xAA (self-test passed) collides with Left Shift break (0x2A | 0x80)
- Hot-plug keyboards sending 0xAA post-initialization would trigger spurious
  Shift key release events
- Protocol layer filters during init, but no post-init protection

Solution:
- Add explicit blacklist in Set 1 scancode processor (set1/scancode.c)
- Apply same filtering to unified processor (set123/scancode.c)
- Optimize code path: handle_keyboard_report(code & 0x7F, code < 0x80)
- Set 2/3 processors log these codes (following TMK pattern)

Documentation Updates:
- Added "Self-Test Code Collision" section to Set 1 documentation
- Updated Set 2/3/123 docs explaining defense-in-depth approach
- Updated AT/PS2 and XT protocol docs for filtering strategy
- Cross-referenced all scancode sets for consistency

Implementation follows IBM BIOS strategy ("throw away invalid codes") and
TMK's authoritative scancode handling patterns.

Fixes potential hot-plug key event corruption in Set 1 scancode processing.

docs/scancodes/set2.md, after:

# Scancode Set 2 (AT/PS2)

Scancode Set 2 was introduced with the IBM PC/AT and is used by PS/2 keyboards and many USB keyboards that internally use PS/2-style scancodes.

Set 2 differs from Set 1 in encoding: break codes use an F0 prefix rather than a high-bit flag (bit 7), allowing the full 8-bit range for make codes. The F0 prefix encoding requires a 9-state processing state machine compared to Set 1's 5-state machine. Certain sequences such as Pause/Break use longer multi-byte sequences in Set 2 than in Set 1. Set 2 supports bidirectional communication—the host can send commands to the keyboard for LED control, typematic (key repeat) configuration, and scancode set selection.

## Encoding Scheme

### Basic Encoding

Set 2 encoding:
- **Make codes**: Single byte (0x01-0x83)
- **Break codes**: Two bytes (`F0` + make code)
- No high-bit encoding for release

### Make and Break Codes

| Event | Encoding | Example (A key = 0x1C) |
|-------|----------|------------------------|
| **Key Press (Make)** | `code` | `1C` |
| **Key Release (Break)** | `F0 code` | `F0 1C` |

This scheme provides:
- Clear separation between make and break events
- Full 8-bit keyspace for make codes
- Consistent two-byte break sequences

### Extended Keys (E0 Prefix)

The IBM Enhanced Keyboard (introduced with the IBM AT) added keys not present on the original keyboard. Set 2 uses the E0 prefix byte to encode these extended keys in a separate namespace from existing scancodes. Extended keys use three bytes for a complete press/release cycle: E0 (prefix), scancode (press), and F0 + scancode (release).

Extended keys use a multi-byte sequence:

| Event | Encoding | Example (Right Control = 0x14) |
|-------|----------|--------------------------------|
| **Extended Make** | `E0 code` | `E0 14` |
| **Extended Break** | `E0 F0 code` | `E0 F0 14` |

Extended keys include:
- Right Alt (AltGr): `E0 11`
- Right Control: `E0 14`
- Arrow keys: `E0 75` (Up), `E0 72` (Down), `E0 6B` (Left), `E0 74` (Right)
- Navigation: Insert, Delete, Home, End, Page Up, Page Down
- Windows keys: `E0 1F` (Left Win), `E0 27` (Right Win)
- Application key: `E0 2F`
- Multimedia keys: Various `E0` sequences
- Keypad `/`: `E0 4A`

### Pause/Break Key (E1 Prefix)

The Pause/Break key uses a complex sequence in Set 2:

| Event | Sequence |
|-------|----------|
| **Pause** | `E1 14 77 E1 F0 14 F0 77` (8 bytes!) |
| **Break** (Ctrl+Pause) | `E0 7E E0 F0 7E` |
| **Unicomp Pause** | `E0 77 E0 F0 77` (Unicomp New Model M variant) |

**Important**: 
- Pause sends the full 8-byte sequence on press only
- No separate release event for Pause
- Break (Ctrl+Pause) is a different 4-byte sequence (E0 7E)
- Some keyboards (Unicomp) use E0 77 for Pause instead of E1 sequence

**USB HID Mapping:**
- All Pause variants map to **interface code 0x48** (USB HID Pause/Break key)
- E1 sequences (regular Pause): `E1 14 77` → 0x48
- E0 7E (Ctrl+Pause): `E0 7E` → 0x48 (with Ctrl modifier)
- E0 77 (Unicomp): `E0 77` → 0x48
- See Issue #21 for historical context on E0 mapping fixes
- Note: Some very old or non-compliant keyboards may not emit the E1 prefix for Pause
  (they instead send a bare sequence that looks like Ctrl+NumLock). Such keyboards cannot
  be reliably distinguished from intentional Ctrl+key combinations in firmware without
  introducing fragile heuristics that break other combinations. Recommended workaround:
  remap an unused physical key (for example Scroll Lock) to PAUS in your keyboard
  configuration if you need a dedicated Pause key for a non-compliant keyboard.

### Fake Shift Codes

Set 2 Print Screen sequences include "fake shift" codes similar to Set 1, but with different scancode values. Implementations must filter these fake shift codes to prevent unintended Shift key events.

Set 2 Print Screen sequences include fake shift codes:

| Sequence | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `E0 12 E0 7C` | Print Screen press (fake left shift + actual) |
| `E0 F0 7C E0 F0 12` | Print Screen release |

**Fake shift bytes to ignore:**
- `E0 12` - Fake Left Shift press
- `E0 F0 12` - Fake Left Shift release
- `E0 59` - Fake Right Shift press (rare)
- `E0 F0 59` - Fake Right Shift release (rare)

## State Machine

Set 2 requires a **9-state** state machine:

```
┌─────────────┐
│    INIT     │ ◄─────────────────────────────┐
└─────┬───────┘                               │
      │                                       │
      ├─[F0]──► F0 ──[code]──────────────────┤
      │                                       │
      ├─[E0]──► E0 ──┬─[F0]──► E0_F0 ──[code]┤
      │              │                        │
      │              └─[code]─────────────────┤
      │                                       │
      ├─[E1]──► E1 ──[14]──► E1_14 ──[77]──► E1_14_77 ──[E1]──► E1_PAUSE ──[F0]──► E1_F0 ──[14]──► E1_F0_14 ──[F0]──► E1_F0_14_F0 ──[77]───┐
      │                                                                                                                                          │
      └─[code]────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

### State Descriptions

| State | Description | Next Action |
|-------|-------------|-------------|
| **INIT** | Waiting for scancode | Process code or enter prefix state |
| **F0** | F0 (break) prefix received | Process key release |
| **E0** | E0 (extended) prefix received | Extended key or break |
| **E0_F0** | E0 F0 sequence received | Extended key release |
| **E1** | E1 (Pause) prefix received | Begin Pause sequence |
| **E1_14** | E1 14 received | Expect 77 |
| **E1_14_77** | E1 14 77 received | Expect E1 |
| **E1_PAUSE** | E1 14 77 E1 received | Expect F0 |
| **E1_F0** | E1 14 77 E1 F0 received | Expect 14 |
| **E1_F0_14** | E1 14 77 E1 F0 14 received | Expect F0 |
| **E1_F0_14_F0** | E1 14 77 E1 F0 14 F0 received | Expect 77, complete |

## Key Characteristics

**What works well:**

The keyspace is larger—full 8-bit make codes mean you can have up to 256 keys without resorting to complex workarounds. All break codes follow the same structure: F0 followed by the make code, which is more consistent than Set 1's high-bit approach. The prefix bytes clearly separate extended keys from normal ones, and breaks from makes. Practically every PC keyboard supports Set 2, so compatibility's excellent. The bidirectional protocol means the host can control LEDs, adjust typematic behaviour, and send other commands to the keyboard.

**Where it gets complicated:**

Your state machine grows to 9 states to handle all the possible sequences. Every keystroke needs at least 2 bytes (one for make, two for break), which makes it more verbose than Set 1. Print Screen still requires filtering fake shifts, which is a compatibility holdover. The Pause key uses an 8-byte sequence. The translation tables are a bit larger too, around 300 bytes versus Set 1's standard size.  

## Code Range

| Range | Usage |
|-------|-------|
| `0x01-0x07` | F keys (F7-F12, partial) |
| `0x08-0x0E` | F keys and special |
| `0x0F-0x7E` | Main keyboard keys |
| `0x7F-0x83` | Extended keys, special codes |
| `0x84+` | Reserved |

## Special Codes

| Code | Description |
|------|-------------|
| `0x00` | Error/Overrun |
| `0x83` | F7 key |
| `0x84` | Alt Print Screen (some keyboards) |
| `0xAA` | Self-test passed (BAT) |
| `0xE0` | Extended key prefix |
| `0xE1` | Pause/Break prefix |
| `0xEE` | Echo response |
| `0xF0` | Break (release) prefix |
| `0xFA` | Acknowledge (ACK) |
| `0xFC` | Self-test failed |
| `0xFD` | Internal failure |
| `0xFE` | Resend request |
| `0xFF` | Error/Buffer overflow |

**Self-Test Codes (`0xAA`, `0xFC`):** These keyboard initialization codes are filtered by the protocol layer during initialization. The scancode processor provides defense-in-depth for post-initialization scenarios (hot-plug, unstable connections). Unlike Set 1, Set 2 has no collision issue since break codes use the F0 prefix. See [Set 1 Self-Test Code Collision](set1.md#self-test-code-collision) for comparison.

## Example Sequences

### Regular Key (A)
```
Press:   1C
Release: F0 1C
```

### Extended Key (Right Arrow)
```
Press:   E0 74
Release: E0 F0 74
```

### Print Screen (with fake shifts)
```
Press:   E0 12 E0 7C  (filter E0 12, process E0 7C)
Release: E0 F0 7C E0 F0 12  (process E0 F0 7C, filter E0 F0 12)
```

### Pause/Break
```
Pause:   E1 14 77 E1 F0 14 F0 77  (8 bytes, press only, no release)
Break:   E0 7E E0 F0 7E            (Ctrl+Pause, separate 4-byte sequence)
```

### Multimedia Key (Volume Up, example)
```
Press:   E0 32
Release: E0 F0 32
```

## Implementation Notes

### Processing Algorithm

```c
// Simplified Set 2 processing
switch (state) {
    case INIT:
        if (code == 0xF0) {
            state = F0;
        } else if (code == 0xE0) {
            state = E0;
        } else if (code == 0xE1) {
            state = E1;
        } else {
            handle_key(code, true);  // Make
        }
        break;
    
    case F0:
        handle_key(code, false);  // Break
        state = INIT;
        break;
    
    case E0:
        if (code == 0xF0) {
            state = E0_F0;
        } else if (code != 0x12 && code != 0x59) {
            // Filter fake shifts
            uint8_t key = translate_e0_key(code);
            handle_key(key, true);  // Extended make
            state = INIT;
        } else {
            state = INIT;  // Filtered fake shift
        }
        break;
    
    case E0_F0:
        if (code != 0x12 && code != 0x59) {
            uint8_t key = translate_e0_key(code);
            handle_key(key, false);  // Extended break
        }
        state = INIT;
        break;
    
    case E1:
        // Pause sequence handling...
        break;
}
```

### Translation Requirements

E0-prefixed keys require translation:
- Map extended scancodes to logical key codes
- Distinguish numeric keypad from navigation cluster
- Handle multimedia and browser control keys
- Support ACPI power keys (some keyboards)

### Host Commands

Set 2 supports bidirectional communication:

| Command | Value | Description |
|---------|-------|-------------|
| **Set LEDs** | `0xED` | Control Caps/Num/Scroll Lock LEDs |
| **Echo** | `0xEE` | Echo test (keyboard responds with `0xEE`) |
| **Get/Set Scancode Set** | `0xF0` | Query or change scancode set |
| **Identify** | `0xF2` | Request keyboard ID (2 bytes) |
| **Set Typematic** | `0xF3` | Set repeat rate and delay |
| **Enable** | `0xF4` | Enable keyboard scanning |
| **Disable** | `0xF5` | Disable keyboard scanning |
| **Set Default** | `0xF6` | Reset to default parameters |
| **Reset** | `0xFF` | Keyboard self-test and reset |

### Typematic (Auto-Repeat)

Set 2 keyboards support configurable typematic:
- **Repeat rate**: 2-30 characters per second
- **Delay**: 250ms, 500ms, 750ms, or 1000ms
- Configured via `0xF3` command + parameter byte

## Performance Characteristics

- **Average bytes per keystroke**: 2.5 (1 make + 2 break on average)
- **State machine complexity**: High (9 states)
- **Processing overhead**: Medium (more state transitions)
- **Memory requirements**: ~300 bytes for E0 translation table

## Source Code

- **[`scancode.h`](../../src/scancodes/set2/scancode.h)** - Set 2 processor interface
- **[`scancode.c`](../../src/scancodes/set2/scancode.c)** - State machine implementation
- **[Unified Processor](../../src/scancodes/set123/)** - Multi-set processor including Set 2

## Keyboards Using Set 2

- All standard PS/2 keyboards (1987-present)
- IBM Model M keyboards with AT/PS2 interface
- IBM Model F PC/AT keyboards (with timeout, default to Set 2)
- Modern USB keyboards in PS/2 compatibility mode
- Cherry MX keyboards with PS/2 interface
- Mechanical keyboards with PS/2 option

## Keyboard Identification

Set 2 keyboards respond to `0xF2` (Identify) command with 2-byte ID.

**Source**: [tmk Keyboard Wiki - AT Keyboard Protocol](https://github.com/tmk/tmk_keyboard/wiki/IBM-PC-AT-Keyboard-Protocol#keyboard-id)

### Set 2 Keyboard IDs

| ID (hex) | Description | Models | Notes |
|----------|-------------|--------|-------|
| None | IBM PC/AT 84-key (Model F) | IBM 6450225 | Doesn't respond to 0xF2 |
| `AB 41` | MF2 keyboard (PS/2 standard) | Standard PS/2 keyboards | |
| `AB 83` | MF2 keyboard with translator | Standard PS/2 ID | Cherry G80-3600, IBM 101, Topre Realforce, etc. |
| `AB 84` | Short keyboard (no numpad) | Tenkeyless, Spacesaver | ThinkPad keyboards, space-saving models |
| `AB 85` | Mixed models | NCD N-97, IBM 122-key Model M | NCD N-97 uses Set 3, IBM 122-key varies |

### Terminal Keyboard IDs (Support Set 3)

These keyboards support Set 3, but many default to Set 2 or Set 1:

| ID (hex) | Description | Default Set | Supports |
|----------|-------------|-------------|----------|
| `AB 86` | Terminal keyboards | Set 2 | Set 3 |
|  | - Cherry G80-2551 126-key | | |
|  | - IBM 1397000 | | |
|  | - Unicomp UB40856 | | |
|  | - Other 122-key terminals | | |
| `AB 90` | IBM 5576-002 (Japanese) | Set 2 | Set 3 |
| `AB 91` | IBM 5576-003 (Japanese) | Set 1 | Sets 2, 3 |
|  | Televideo 990/995 DEC style | Set 1 | Sets 2, 3 |
| `AB 92` | IBM 5576-001 (Japanese) | Set 2 | Set 3, 82h |
| `BF BF` | IBM Terminal 122-key | Set 3 | - |
|  | - IBM 1390876, 6110344 | | DIP switch configurable ID |
| `BF B0` | IBM RT keyboard (US) | Set 3 | - |
| `BF B1` | IBM RT keyboard (ISO) | Set 3 | - |
| `7F 7F` | IBM Terminal 101-key | Set 3 | - |
|  | - IBM 1394204 | | Always Set 3, doesn't support F0 |

**Important**: This converter DETECTS which scancode set these keyboards are currently using based on their ID. It does NOT send `F0 03` commands to switch scancode sets. For keyboards detected as Set 3, the converter only sends the `0xF8` command to configure make/break mode.


## Protocol Notes

### LED Control

Host can control LEDs via `0xED` command:
```
Host sends: ED
Keyboard ACKs: FA
Host sends: LED bitmap (bit 0=Scroll, bit 1=Num, bit 2=Caps)
Keyboard ACKs: FA
```

### Scancode Set Switching (Manual Commands)

Keyboards that support multiple scancode sets can be switched manually by the host:
```
Host sends: F0 01  (switch to Set 1)
Host sends: F0 02  (switch to Set 2)
Host sends: F0 03  (switch to Set 3)
```

**Note**: These are commands available to the host system. This converter does NOT send these commands automatically - it detects the keyboard's current scancode set based on the keyboard ID.


## References

- [IBM Personal Computer AT Technical Reference (1986)](http://bitsavers.org/pdf/ibm/pc/at/6183355_PC_AT_Technical_Reference_Mar86.pdf)
- [PS/2 Hardware Technical Reference (1990)](http://www.mcamafia.de/pdf/pdfref.htm)
- [tmk Keyboard Wiki - AT Keyboard Protocol](https://github.com/tmk/tmk_keyboard/wiki/IBM-PC-AT-Keyboard-Protocol)
- [Microsoft Keyboard Scan Code Specification](https://download.microsoft.com/download/1/6/1/161ba512-40e2-4cc9-843a-923143f3456c/scancode.pdf)
- [IBM Model F AT - VintagePC](https://www.seasip.info/VintagePC/ibm_6450225.html)
---

## Related Documentation

- [AT/PS2 Protocol](../protocols/at-ps2.md) - Protocol specification using Scancode Set 2
- [Protocols Overview](../protocols/README.md) - All supported protocols
- [Architecture](../advanced/README.md) - System architecture and scancode processing

---

**Questions or stuck on something?**  
Pop into [GitHub Discussions](https://github.com/PaulW/rp2040-keyboard-converter/discussions) or [report a bug](https://github.com/PaulW/rp2040-keyboard-converter/issues) if you've found an issue.
